feat: added new lifecycle section (#532)
italia/eidas-it-wallet-docs: docs/en/lifecycle.rst

There is a relationship between the lifecycle of the attributes managed by the Authentic Source and the Digital Credential lifecycle
managed by the Credential Issuer. Indeed, one of the reasons for revocation or suspension of Digital Credentials is the update/revocation or 
suspension of the attributes contained in the Digital Credential. In IT Wallet, the provisioning of User's attributes and the notification of 
updates or changes in the state of the attributes are exchanged using the PDND infrastructure (see relative sections for more details).

The Wallet Provider is in charge of the implementation and provision of Wallet Instances also handling their entire lifecycle. 

In this section, state machines are presented to explain the Wallet Instance and Digital Credential states and their transitions and relations.

.. note::

  PID is specialized Digital Credential type that produces impacts on the Wallet Instance's lifecycle. The revocation of the PID MAY also have potential impacts on (Q)EAAs, if these was issued using the presentation of the PID. 
  When the distinction between PID and (Q)EAA is not needed, the term Digital Credential is used.

.. note::

>   In the current version of `ARF`_, two types of attestations have been introduced: Wallet Trust Evidence (WTE) and Wallet Instance Attestation (WIA). The first to prove that the keys used for key 

Author: ```suggestion
  In the current version of `EIDAS-ARF`_, two types of attestations have been introduced: Wallet Trust Evidence (WTE) and Wallet Instance Attestation (WIA). The first to prove that the keys used for key 
```

    
    Digital Credential Lifecycle.

.. note::

  Users MAY present a Digital Credential in any state, it is up to the Relying Party's policy to accept a not Valid Digital Credential. 
  An example of this scenario is when a Relying Party needs to verify that the User is not a minor. In this case, even if the User presents an 
  **Issued/Expired/Revoked** or **Suspended** Digital Credential, the age claim is still reliable.

.. note::

  While **Issued**, **Valid**, **Expired**, **Revoked** are explicitly mentioned in the ARF (see Figure 5 of ARF v1.4), 

>   **Suspended** is implicitly present in `ARF`_. This specification explicitly considers it.

Author: ```suggestion
  **Suspended** is implicitly present in `EIDAS-ARF`_. This specification explicitly considers it.
```

.. include:: ../common/common_definitions.rst

.. _lifecycle.rst:

Wallet Instance and Digital Credential Lifecycle
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> A Credential Issuer is responsible for creating and issuing Digital Credentials, as well as managing their lifecycle and validity status. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Credential Issuer is responsible for creating and issuing Digital Credentials, as well as managing their lifecycle and validity status. 
```

Reviewer: this and the one below seems more redefinition of what already defined within the defined terms ... but, since they are so small, we can live with them anyway.

> An Authentic Source is the entity responsible for the management and provisioning of User's attributes to Credential Issuers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Authentic Source is the entity responsible for the management and provisioning of User's attributes to Credential Issuers. 
```

There is a relationship between the lifecycle of the attributes managed by the Authentic Source and the Digital Credential lifecycle
managed by the Credential Issuer. Indeed, one of the reasons for revocation or suspension of Digital Credentials is the update/revocation or 
suspension of the attributes contained in the Digital Credential. In IT Wallet, the provisioning of User's attributes and the notification of 
updates or changes in the state of the attributes are exchanged using the PDND infrastructure (see relative sections for more details).

> Finally, a Wallet Provider is in charge of the implementation and provision of Wallet Instances also handling their entire lifecycle. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Wallet Provider is in charge of the implementation and provision of Wallet Instances also handling their entire lifecycle. 
```

In this section, state machines are presented to explain the Wallet Instance and Digital Credential states and their transitions and relations.

.. note::

>   We distinguish PID from (Q)EAA, as its issuance effects on the Wallet Instance's lifecycle, and additionally its revocation may have potential impacts on (Q)EAAs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  PID is specialized Digital Credential type that produces impacts on the Wallet Instance's lifecycle. The revocation of the PID MAY also have potential impacts on (Q)EAAs, if these was issued using the presentation of the PID. 
```

aridanghete con "we" :-)

  When the distinction between PID and (Q)EAA is not needed, the term Digital Credential is used.

.. note::

>   In the current version of ARF v1.4.1, two types of attestations have been introduced: Wallet Trust Evidence (WTE) and Wallet Instance Attestation (WIA). The first to prove that the keys used for key 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In the current version of `ARF`_, two types of attestations have been introduced: Wallet Trust Evidence (WTE) and Wallet Instance Attestation (WIA). The first to prove that the keys used for key 
```

the version of the ARF in use and referenced in this documentation is the one defined in the referenced standards. We really do not have to disseminate weak or static references within the specs

Reviewer: I would like to have the alignments with the IA terminology too- Otherwise we will use a separate PR within milestone 1.0 to have this alignment

  used as proof of both the Wallet Instance authenticity and WSCD trustworthiness. The future version of this specification will be updated accordingly. 

Wallet Instance
---------------
As shown in :numref:`fig_Wallet_Instance_States`, the Wallet Instance has four distinct states: **Installed**, **Operational**, **Valid**, and **Uninstalled**. 
Each state represents a specific functional status and determines the actions that can be performed.

.. _fig_Wallet_Instance_States:
.. figure:: ../../images/Wallet_Instance_States.svg
    :figwidth: 100%
    :align: center
    :target: https://www.plantuml.com/plantuml/svg/XPBHIuH04CRVzwyOk9SAH8ipGaHESW-4kEpihg1wi7ElMzXRHLUY_lfMAvtMZlD5cUytttpZxgnMMQMQlI0xdZDW-r9zGCxgJSLBnGj9Y0OKWrZgjn0iXyby7hgEyrE_BLcLjM0cOBBLJw-iCy4rxJXNJbzRIJxuH9TJT-eI0W1FPozWvSMxj89XaWSFCSIBzBubXd8FjcOONIt-Wol-jbEQHa4xEhpkK5m_xcpWWctLAF6IhaUaET_V5AAel5VHiE3axfI68SHfQYTBwjkT51pCrltMlmv97BNjkFKR0wifZT5c7trCxDz6U9POrelO4RqvP3jU6n4egB4gnQlYiJWLKf7fyUF14bWQrHTBHwZv9_FEBmBVRhy2CcCorrV-2m00

    Wallet Instance Lifecycle.

.. note::

>   The Wallet Provider MUST ensure the security and reliability of the Wallet Instances. To achieve this, the Wallet Provider MUST keep the Wallet Instances updated and compliant with security requirements. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The Wallet Provider MUST ensure the security and reliability of the Wallet Instances. To achieve this, the Wallet Provider MUST periodically checks the Wallet Instances security and compliance status. 
```

only the user can update the WI

  For this reason, the Wallet Instance revocation transition is accomplished by deleting the Wallet Cryptographic Hardware Key from the WSCD of the Wallet 
  Instance and from the account associated with the User. This transition is completed when the Wallet Instance is online.

Transition to Operational
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
After installation, the User opens the Wallet Instance and an activation begins (**WI ACT**). 
At this stage, a User account MUST be created with the Wallet Provider and associated with the Wallet Instance through the Wallet Cryptographic 
Hardware Key Tag, subject to obtaining the User's consent (see the “Wallet Instance Initialization and Registration” section for more details). 
This association allows the User to directly request Wallet Instance revocation from the Wallet Provider, and it also allows the Wallet Provider to 
revoke the Wallet Instance associated with that User.

.. note::

  As a result of the User account creation, an authentication mechanism MUST be set for the User to interact with the Wallet Provider portal. 

>   This specification mandates the use of at least a second-factor User authentication.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This specification mandates the use of at least a second-factor for User authentication.  
```

we should mention an internional LoA threshold, such those defined in NIST ...

Reviewer 2: AFAIK, this is not defined in EUDI yet. I suggest to wait for an update from EU before define more details here. What do you think?

Reviewer: moved to issue, ok.

As part of the activation, the Wallet Provider MUST evaluate the operating system and general technical capabilities of the device to check compliance 
with the technical and security requirements, and the authenticity and integrity of the installed Wallet Instance. 

> Upon successful verification, a Wallet Attestation MUST be issued and the Wallet Instance enters the **Operational** state. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon successful verification, the Wallet Provider MUST issue at least one valid Wallet Attestation to the Wallet Instance, therefore the Wallet Instance enters the **Operational** state. 
```

In addition, if not already done, Users MUST set their preferred method of unlocking their Wallet Instance; this can be accomplished by entering a 

> personal identification number (PIN) or by utilizing biometric authentication, such as fingerprint or facial recognition, according to their personal 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, if not already done, Users MUST set their preferred method of unlocking their Wallet Instance; this MAY be accomplished by entering a 
personal identification number (PIN) or by utilizing biometric authentication, such as fingerprint or facial recognition, according to personal 
```

> preferences and device's capabilities. Please refer to the relevant sections for further information about Wallet Instance activation.

Author: ```suggestion
preferences and device's capabilities. Please refer to `Wallet Attestation`_.
```

> In this state, Users can request the issuance of a PID (**PID ISS** transition) or of (Q)EAAs if the PID is not required in the issuance phase 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the **Operational** state, Users can request the issuance of PID (**PID ISS**) or (Q)EAAs if the PID is not required in the issuance 
```

remember to put the subject to make the sentence always linear and clear

> (**(Q)EEA ISS** transitions). In addition, if the credentials are (Q)EEAs and for the presentation they do not require the PID, they can be presented 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(**(Q)EEA ISS**). In addition, if the Digital Credentials are (Q)EEAs and for the presentation they do not require the PID, they can be presented 
```

without transitioning the Wallet Instance to another state (**(Q)EEA PRE** transition). 

> A **Valid** Wallet Instance MUST transition back to the **Operational** state due to **PID EXP/REV/DEL** transition, when the associated PID expires, or 
> revoked by its Provider or either deleted by the User. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A **Valid** Wallet Instance MUST transition back to the **Operational** state due to **PID EXP/REV/DEL** transition, when the associated PID expires, or is revoked by its Provider or either deleted by the User. 
```

Transition to Valid
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
A transition to the Valid state occurs only when the Wallet Instance obtains a valid PID (**PID ISS**). In this state, Users can obtain and present 

> new (Q)EAAs (**(Q)EAA ISS/PRE**), and present the PID (**PID PRE**). Please refer to the relevant sections for further information about PID and (Q)EAAs 
> issuance and presentation.

Author: ```suggestion
new (Q)EAAs (**(Q)EAA ISS/PRE**), and present the PID (**PID PRE**). Please refer to :ref:`PID/(Q)EAA Issuance` and :ref:`Relying Party Solution`.
```

.. note::

  Users can have only one Wallet Instance in **Valid** state for the same Wallet Solution. Thus, when a User installs and obtains a PID on a new Wallet 

>   Instance of the same Wallet Solution from the same Wallet Provider, the PID in the previous Wallet Instance MUST be revoked and the Wallet Instance goes 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Instance of the same Wallet Solution from the same Wallet Provider, the PID in the previous Wallet Instance MUST be revoked and the Wallet Instance became 
```

>   into **Operational** state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  **Operational**.
```

Transition to Uninstalled
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Across all states — **Installed**, **Actived**, **Operational**, or **Valid** — the Wallet Instance may be removed entirely through the Wallet Instance 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Across all states, **Installed**, **Actived**, **Operational**, or **Valid**, the Wallet Instance can be removed entirely through the Wallet Instance 
```

    
    Digital Credential Lifecycle.

.. note::

  Users MAY present a Digital Credential in any state, it is up to the Relying Party's policy to accept a not Valid Digital Credential. 
  An example of this scenario is when a Relying Party needs to verify that the User is not a minor. In this case, even if the User presents an 
  **Issued/Expired/Revoked** or **Suspended** Digital Credential, the age claim is still reliable.

.. note::

  While **Issued**, **Valid**, **Expired**, **Revoked** are explicitly mentioned in the ARF (see Figure 5 of ARF v1.4), 

>   **Suspended** is implicitly present in the text. For clarity and completeness, in this specification we explicitly consider it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  **Suspended** is implicitly present in `ARF`_. This specification explicitly considers it.
```

Transition to Issued
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> For the state machine to start, the Wallet Instance MUST be in either the **Operational** or **Valid** state, enabling credentials to be issued to it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the state machine to start, the Wallet Instance MUST be in either the **Operational** or **Valid** state, enabling Digital Credentials to be issued to it. 
```

The state machine begins with the **Issued** state, when an issuance process is triggered and, as a result, a Digital Credential is issued to the 

> Wallet Instance (**PID/(Q)EAA ISS**). Please refer to the relevant sections for further information about PID and (Q)EAAs issuance process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wallet Instance (**PID/(Q)EAA ISS**). Please refer to the relevant sections for further information about PID and (Q)EAAs issuance process.
```

I admit to get tired to read so many times the statement `Please refer to the relevant sections for further information about`. I ask to use a shorter sentece with a href reference to the relevant section, or delete the entire statement.

> Wallet Instance (**PID/(Q)EAA ISS**). Please refer to the relevant sections for further information about PID and (Q)EAAs issuance process.

Author: ```suggestion
Wallet Instance (**PID/(Q)EAA ISS**). Please refer to :ref:`PID/(Q)EAA Issuance`.
```

Transition to Valid
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
A Digital Credential changes to **Valid** state when: 

  * it reaches its start date of validity;
  * an unsuspension process is triggered if the (Q)EAA has been suspended. 

> Please refer to the relevant sections for further information about (Q)EAAs unsuspension process.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Transition to Expired
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
A Digital Credential naturally transitions to the **Expired** state when it automatically expires upon reaching its end date of validity (**PID/(Q)EAA EXP**), 
indicating they are no longer valid for use.

If a Digital Credential is **Expired** the Wallet Instance SHOULD notify the User the Digital Credential has expired and the User MAY delete it (**PID/(Q)EAA DEL**). 
This ends its lifecycle.

Transition to Revoked
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> A Digital Credential changes from **Issued**, **Valid** or **Suspended** states to **Revoked** state when it is actively revoked by the Credential Issuer 
> by a revocation process (**PID/(Q)EAA REV**), declaring that Relying Parties SHOULD no longer trust a particular Digital Credential, even though it is 
> still valid temporally and contains a valid Credential Issuer signature. Revocation can occur in the following cases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Digital Credential changes from **Issued**, **Valid** or **Suspended** states to **Revoked** state when it is actively revoked by the Credential Issuer 
by a revocation process (**PID/(Q)EAA REV**). The Relying Parties SHOULD no longer consider usable a particular Digital Credential when it is **Revoked**, even though it is 
still valid temporally and contains a valid Credential Issuer signature. Revocation can occur in the following cases:
```

  * for technical security reasons relating to the compromise of cryptographic material; 
  * in case of explicit User requests;
  * as a consequence of an attribute update by Authentic Sources;
  * in case of a revocation of the attributes contained in the Digital Credential notified by the Authentic Source;
  * death of the User;
  * revocation of Wallet Instance to which the Digital Credential was issued;
  * illegal activities of the User reported by Judicial or Supervisory Bodies.

In the case of PID only, the following cases are in addition to those listed above:

  * detection of a breach of the digital identity issued by an Identity Provider and used to authenticate the User during the PID Issuance;

>   * as a result of obtaining a new PID on a new Wallet Instance from the same Wallet Provider that provided the Wallet Instance containing the previous PID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * as a result of obtaining a new PID on a new Wallet Instance from the same Wallet Provider that has provided the Wallet Instance containing a PID previously issued.
```

.. note::

 A (Q)EAA Provider MAY revoke a (Q)EAA in case of PID revocation.

> Please refer to the relevant sections for further details about Digital Credential Revocation.

Author: ```suggestion
```

When a Digital Credential is **Revoked** it cannot transition back to **Valid**, the Wallet Instance SHOULD notify the User the Digital Credential 
has been revoked and the User MAY delete it (**PID/(Q)EAA DEL**). This ends its lifecycle.

Transition to Suspended
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> A (Q)EAA changes from **Issued** or **Valid** states to **Suspended** state when it is suspended by the Credential Issuer (**(Q)EAA SUSP**), 
> it stays in this state until it is restored to the **Issued** or **Valid** state (**(Q)EAA UNSUSP**) depending on the previous state, i.e. 
> the conditions leading to its suspension are resolved, or it changes in **Revoked**, **Expired** or it is deleted. The suspension of a (Q)EAA MAY be: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A (Q)EAA changes from **Issued** or **Valid** states to **Suspended** state when it is suspended by the Credential Issuer (**(Q)EAA SUSP**).
The (Q)EAA remains **Suspended** until it is restored to the **Issued** or **Valid** state (**(Q)EAA UNSUSP**) depending on the previous state, i.e. 
the conditions leading to its suspension are resolved, or it changes in **Revoked**, **Expired** or it is deleted. The suspension of a (Q)EAA MAY be: 
```

    
    Digital Credential Lifecycle Management.

A User, through the Wallet Instance, is able to acquire a new Digital Credential (**Credential Acquisition**) performing the **PID/(Q)EAA ISS** process. This MUST result in the storage of a 
Digital Credential in the **Issued/Valid** state, and delete it when it is not needed anymore or it is **Expired/Revoked** (**Credential Deletion**). 
Until the **Credential Deletion**, a Digital Credential can be presented to Relying Parties, this operation will not affect its lifecycle.

A Credential Issuer instead is responsible for:

  * **Digital Credential Generation**: the Digital Credential is generated as a consequence of an issuance request and MUST be added to the local storage of the Credential Issuer after the successful issuance. 

>   * **Digital Credential Revocation/Suspension/Unsuspension** (**PID/(Q)EAA REV** and **(Q)EAA SUSP/UNSUSP**): for technical security reasons or triggered by  external entities (e.g., Users and Authentic Sources) the Digital Credential state MUST be locally updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * **Digital Credential Revocation/Suspension/Unsuspension** (**PID/(Q)EAA REV** and **(Q)EAA SUSP/UNSUSP**): for technical security reasons or triggered by external entities (e.g., Users and Authentic Sources) the Digital Credential state MUST be locally updated.
```

  * **Data Purging**: after reaching the **Expired** state, and based on the Credential Issuer retention policies, Digital Credentials MUST be removed from the local storage of the Credential Issuer.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
.. _Wallet Attestation: wallet-attestation.html

```

An Authentic Source is the entity responsible for the management and provisioning of User's attributes to Credential Issuers. 
There is a relationship between the lifecycle of the attributes managed by the Authentic Source and the Digital Credential lifecycle
managed by the Credential Issuer. Indeed, one of the reasons for revocation or suspension of Digital Credentials is the update/revocation or 
suspension of the attributes contained in the Digital Credential. In IT Wallet, the provisioning of User's attributes and the notification of 
updates or changes in the state of the attributes are exchanged using the PDND infrastructure (see relative sections for more details).

Finally, a Wallet Provider is in charge of the implementation and provision of Wallet Instances also handling their entire lifecycle. 

In this section, state machines are presented to explain the Wallet Instance and Digital Credential states and their transitions and relations.

.. note::

  We distinguish PID from (Q)EAA, as its issuance effects on the Wallet Instance's lifecycle, and additionally its revocation may have potential impacts on (Q)EAAs. 

>   When the distinction between PID and (Q)EAA is not needed, we use the general term Digital Credential.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  When the distinction between PID and (Q)EAA is not needed, the term Digital Credential is used.
```

  used as proof of both the Wallet Instance authenticity and WSCD trustworthiness. The future version of this specification will be updated accordingly. 

Wallet Instance
---------------
As shown in :numref:`fig_Wallet_Instance_States`, the Wallet Instance has four distinct states: **Installed**, **Operational**, **Valid**, and **Uninstalled**. 
Each state represents a specific functional status and determines the actions that can be performed.

.. _fig_Wallet_Instance_States:
.. figure:: ../../images/Wallet_Instance_States.svg
    :figwidth: 100%
    :align: center
    :target: https://www.plantuml.com/plantuml/svg/XPBHIuH04CRVzwyOk9SAH8ipGaHESW-4kEpihg1wi7ElMzXRHLUY_lfMAvtMZlD5cUytttpZxgnMMQMQlI0xdZDW-r9zGCxgJSLBnGj9Y0OKWrZgjn0iXyby7hgEyrE_BLcLjM0cOBBLJw-iCy4rxJXNJbzRIJxuH9TJT-eI0W1FPozWvSMxj89XaWSFCSIBzBubXd8FjcOONIt-Wol-jbEQHa4xEhpkK5m_xcpWWctLAF6IhaUaET_V5AAel5VHiE3axfI68SHfQYTBwjkT51pCrltMlmv97BNjkFKR0wifZT5c7trCxDz6U9POrelO4RqvP3jU6n4egB4gnQlYiJWLKf7fyUF14bWQrHTBHwZv9_FEBmBVRhy2CcCorrV-2m00

    Wallet Instance Lifecycle.

.. note::

>   The Wallet Provider MUST ensure the security and reliability of the Wallet Instances keeping them updated and compliant with security requirements. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The Wallet Provider MUST ensure the security and reliability of the Wallet Instances. To achieve this, the Wallet Provider MUST keep the Wallet Instances updated and compliant with security requirements. 
```

.. note::

>   Since for the IT Wallet specification a Wallet Attestation is short-lived and automatically re-issued as soon as it expires, the Wallet Instance expiration 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The Wallet Attestation is short-lived. It MUST be automatically re-issued before its expiration time. For this reason, the Wallet Instance expiration 
```

  transition is not considered in :numref:`fig_Wallet_Instance_States`.

Transition to Installed
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The state machine begins with the Wallet Instance installation (**WI INST**) transition, where Users download and install a Wallet Instance provided by the Wallet Provider through the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The state machine begins with the Wallet Instance installation (**WI INST**) transition, where Users download and install a Wallet Instance provided by the Wallet Provider using the 
```

official app store of their device's operating system (this ensures authenticity via system checks), leading to the **Installed** state.

> In this state, the Wallet Instance can interact only with the Wallet Provider to be activated. A Wallet Instance MUST go back to **Installed** state from **Operational** 
> or **Valid** states through the Wallet Instance revocation (**WI REV**), which is a process that marks the Wallet Cryptographic Hardware Key registered during activation 
> (see “Transition to Operational” section) as not usable. Revocation can occur in the following cases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the state is **Installed**, the Wallet Instance MUST interact only with the Wallet Provider to be activated. When the revocation of the Wallet Instance occurs, the Wallet Instance MUST go back from **Operational** or **Valid** to **Installed**. The revocation marks the Wallet Cryptographic Hardware Key, registered during activation 
(see “Transition to Operational” section), as not usable anymore. Revocation can occur in the following cases:
```
